An Audibility Model of the Headband Trial with a Bone Conduction Device in Single-sided Deaf Subjects

Guido Cattani
Koenraad S. Rhebergen
Adriana L. Smit

Corresponding author:
Adriana L. Smit
Department of Otorhinolaryngology and Head & Neck Surgery
University Medical Center Utrecht
House Postal Number G05.129
PO BOX 85500, 3508 GA
Utrecht, The Netherlands
Tel: +31 88 75 56644
E-mail: A.L.Smit-9@umcutrecht.nl


Abstract
Objective 
The current study aimed to analyse the head-shadow-effect compensation in single-sided deafened (SSD) subjects fitted during the headband trial with a transcutaneous bone conduction device (BCD). 
Design
In this retrospective study, we modelled audibility outcomes. The saved instrument settings of the participants were retrospectively loaded on the BCD and used for output measurements on the skull simulator. The sensation levels of the Bone-Conduction and Air-Conduction sound paths were compared, modelling three spatial conditions with speech in quiet. We calculated the phoneme-score using the Speech Intelligibility Index for those conditions and, additionally, for seven conditions with speech and noise from different directions. 
Full head-shadow-effect compensation occurred when the difference between sensation levels of the Bone-Conduction and Air-Conduction sound paths was equivalent of greater than 0.
Study sample 
We used data from eighty-five SSD adults fitted with a BCD during the headband trial period. 
Results 
Most subjects did not reach a full head-shadow-effect compensation with the signal at the BCD-side and in front. The speech understanding in quiet did not improve with the transcutaneous BCD compared to the unaided condition. Regarding the speech understanding in noise, we found a slight improvement in some specific conditions and minimal worsening in others. 
Conclusions 
Based on an audibility model, this study challenges the fundamentals of a trial period with a transcutaneous BCD in subjects with SSD. 
